---
title: How did the peacock get its colorful tail - Khasi Folktale
title_bn: ময়ূরপুচ্ছে রংধনু কীভাবে এলো?
category: Indigenous Folktale
source: Folktales of the Khasis
topics: Khasi
slug: how-did-the-peacock-get-its-colorful-tail-khasi-folktale
language: en
---

# Plot Summary

## English

Long long ago, humans spoke the same language as animals and birds. At that time, U Kliew the peacock had the same gray coat as other birds. Even so, U Klew was very arrogant. He walked among the other birds with his head held high in a majestic manner. He was a vain bird, excessively proud of his long tail and feathers, which were longer and higher than any other bird. He flaunted his tail and feathers and demeaned other birds. The peacock was also a very troublesome neighbour. Due to his large body, he could not meet the birds living in the lowlands. He only interacted with big name birds. And these wealthy birds also catered to his ego a lot, causing the peacock’s pride to grow taller than his feathers.

One day, the birds were discussing in their court about who should they send from the jungle to greet the beautiful Goddess of the blue realm, Ka Snagi? Who would represent the whole forest? The Goddess had brightened everyone’s lives with her light, so the forest dwellers wanted to express their gratitude. At one point of the meeting, the representative chosen was that arrogant peacock, U Klew.

But U Klew was a very scheming bird. He was not just going as representative of the forest. But rather he set off, wagging his tail feathers, intending to woo the Goddess and marry her. He wished to stay in the enchanting blue realm. Even though the birds flattered him in front of him as the representative, no one took his words seriously. Everyone made fun of U Kliew behind his back. They believed such a large bird like the peacock could never fly so high towards the sky. He had never even flown above the trees! But to everyone’s astonishment, the peacock started flying. He flew higher and higher and disappeared beyond everyone's sight. The fierce winds kept U Klew afloat and he eventually reached the palace of Ka Snagi, who was the most beautiful and most noble. The Goddess lived alone in the palace. It was her fate to live alone. So, from time to time, the Goddess yearned for company. Which is why the Goddess was very happy to receive U Klew. She warmly welcomed him into the palace. She was overjoyed after knowing U Kliew’s intentions-

“Finally, I won’t be alone anymore! This noble bird will always accompany me from now on.”

Thus the Goddess and the peacock started cohabiting happily. But there’s a saying that even if you wash coal, the dirt does not go away- the nature does not change! U Kliew had indeed flown to the sky leaving the dirt of the earth behind, but his earthly bad habits did not leave him. He had remained the same selfish bird that he was. Rather, the relaxed luxurious life he led at the palace made him even more self-centred. Every day, he demanded all of Ka Snagi’s attention and benefits. The Goddess was already very generous by nature and gave her all for everyone, so why would she not do the same for her companion?

Ka Snagi, the Sun Goddess, kept everyone on earth safe with her warm light and heat. But after U Kliew came into her life, all of her time went into taking care of him. The Goddess could no longer leave her palace. Meanwhile, the earth became worn out. All the birds in the jungle became silent, their feathers fell off, all the chirping and the songs stopped. The rain God U Slap came and destroyed all the birds’ homes. The small chicks of the birds died. But the heavy rain showed no mercy. On the other hand, dense fog brought a thick layer of dark clouds over the paddy fields. No crops became ripe. Storms came and uprooted trees, turning the surroundings into barren lands- the starved homeless birds started wandering around here and there. Nobody was left to hear the mournful cries of the birds.

At this time, the forest dwellers sought help from human civilization- because even at that time humans were considered the wisest. After understanding the situation, the humans informed them that all of this was happening because of U Klew’s presence in the palace of Ka Snagi. It is because of that arrogant, selfish peacock that the Goddess is not able to perform her duties properly. And thus, she is not radiating her light to the mortal world like before. If it was somehow possible to bring the peacock back to the jungle, then maybe everything would be back to normal. But how to bring him back?

Near the edge of the jungle, there lived a clever woman named Ka Sabui. She had a mustard field. She was living very poorly at that time. Due to the famine in the forest, the birds were eating up her acquired mustard seeds, causing crops to fail. This time the birds came to Ka Sabui asking for help about U Klew.

Ka Sabui said, “Very well, I will bring back the peacock youth within 13 moons. But I have two conditions, the birds must not eat the seeds from my field and should chase away anyone who came to eat! I am in great despair.

After discussing with the birds, Ka Sabui came up with a strange plan. Day by day, she digged up the soil and cultivated the mustard field in the shape of a beautiful woman. She spread out the best seeds. Meanwhile, the birds kept waiting and watching. Ka Sabui took good care of the mustard field. Eventually one day the mustard plants bore green leaves and pretty small yellow flowers. The surroundings were filled with beautiful golden yellow flowers. From a distance, the field looked like the body of a beautiful golden maiden. Everyone was very surprised and even praised Ka Sabui, but nobody understood what was the purpose.

Meanwhile, U Klew was wandering as he pleased in the sky world, tormenting the Sun Goddess. The Goddess was also taking care of him lovingly. But after giving everything she could day by day, the Goddess’s beauty had faded. Now she looked very pale. Nowadays U Klew did not find the Goddess attractive anymore. He could only think about his old house and old friends. One day, while thinking about these, he was wandering around in the sky world when a familiar place on earth captured his attention. It was shining very brightly. After observing for a while he understood, at least it seemed to him that the most beautiful woman on earth, with a body covered in gold was lying there. Seeing her, the greedy U Klew’s heart melted. He lost all interest in the Goddess and the blue realm. He only wanted that golden beauty!

Afterwards U Klew didn’t want to continue living in the blue realm. Leaving everything behind, he wanted to lie on the soil of his motherland and talk in his own language to his friends. One day U Klew could not resist his longing for home, he said, “I want to go back to the jungle”, causing grief to his companion.

The Sun Goddess’s heart broke in sorrow. She had truly fallen in love with this peacock. But despite all her efforts, U Klew did not stop. He was so fast! It was almost impossible to stop him. The more the peacock advanced, the Goddess followed him from behind. The tear pearls from the Goddess touched the peacocks tail feathers. One by one the feathers were dyed in the colors of the rainbow. Some tears became dazzling spots remaining on the peacock’s tail. Even today the Khasis call these spots ‘Ummet Ka Snagi’. Meaning, tears of the sun! It is with these tears that Ka Snagi made U Klew hers forever. Wherever he went, his own tail would remind him of his lover, who stays in the sky, whom he can only meet with his eyes. Now the peacock returned home. Everyone welcomed him with amazement and wonder at his beautiful feathers and tail. U Klew then asked everyone, “ Where is that beautiful golden bodied maiden? Tell me, tell me quickly!” All the birds started laughing heartily. So this was Ka Sabui’s plan? The peacock bowed his head in shame. Meanwhile, all the problems of the world was solved.

It is said that, every morning the peacock looks up towards the sky and greets the arrival of his favourite Goddess Ka Snagi. And when the Goddess descends to the mortal world as sunlight, the peacock spreads his colorful feathers and expresses his joy, with all his happiness written in the vibrant display.
