---
title: How alcohol came to be
title_bn: অ্যালকোহলের উতপত্তি হলো কিভাবে
category: Indigenous Folktale
source: Tripura Lokokahini
topics: Tripura
slug: how-alcohol-came-to-be
language: en
---

A long time ago, when King Shukradeva ruled over Tripura, ghosts used to roam freely in his kingdom. One day, one of his spies came to him and exclaimed, “O Maharaja! The peasants from the southern part of your kingdom are fed up of ghosts and are fleeing their homes. When the women bathe, the ghosts pierce holes in their water buckets. During meals, the ghosts desecrate their plates with urine and feces. Even in their sleep, the ghosts tug at their hair. And when they engage in no activity at all, the mischievous spirits incessantly tickle them. Please do something.” “Why hasn’t the local governor done anything to address this issue?” asked the King furiously. “He tried his best, my lord. But every time he took any initiative, the ghosts would throw stones at his men.” answered the spy.

Upon hearing this, King Shukradeva called a meeting gathering all his ministers, advisors and the commander of his army. For three days and three nights, the council deliberated, searching for a solution. Alas, it became apparent that conventional warfare would prove futile. After exhausting all possible ideas, they decided to call for help. An proclamation was issued throughout the kingdom. Whoever could get rid of the ghosts, would be given the highest rank among the king's advisors. He would be handsomely rewarded and the history books would immortalize this great deed. The announcement reached the ears of the ghosts as well. They decided to wait for 7 days to see who dares to challenge them. Once the wait was over, they would unleash chaos all over the kingdom.

In response to the call for assistance, a skilled Tantrik healer emerged. For over eight decades, he had harnessed his magical prowess to control various supernatural entities. After a journey spanning three days, he arrived at the royal palace. The Tantrik advised the King of a special potion capable of harming the ghosts. To concoct this elixir, he required seven Maunds (৭ মন) each of mustard, rice, ash, wheat-chaff, and turmeric. The kings men promptly gathered the ingredients and scattered the potion throughout the kingdom. It was a miracle. The mantra-infused potion caused a great deal of pain and agony among the ghosts. In their weakened state, the Tantrik dispatched seven enchanted amulets to the governors of the seven regions within the Tripura kingdom. As long as the governors wore the amulet, the ghosts inhabiting in their territory would be enslaved to them.

The tables had turned - the humans now wielded power over the ethereal beings. The governors exploited their new ghost-slaves to fulfill all tasks. The ghosts farmed the land, chopped wood and cleaned the streets, while the human peasants found themselves with ample free time on their hands. One day, a ghost was tasked to bring water for the governor from a nearby river. A female ghost from another kingdom happened to pass by. She was surprised to see the poor ghost doing manual labor. After inquiring, the slave-ghost told her the entire story. The female-ghost felt pity for her fellow ghost. She offered him a bottle and told him to take it to his master. Upon drinking from that bottle, the governor immediately became intoxicated. The female-ghost disguised herself as a dancer, seduced the witless governor and stripped the amulet off his arm. The enslavement spell wore off instantly and the remaining ghosts pulled off the same trick on the remaining governors.

The ghosts vowed to never put themselves at risk again. So they decided to depart the kingdom. But before leaving, they whispered the recipe of this intoxicating drink into the ears of everybody in the kingdom. According to Tripura folklore, this is how alcohol came into existence. Since that time, humans have become so consumed by alcoholism that they pose no threat to the ghosts ever again.
