---
title: The tale of Radha and Krishna
title_bn: শ্রীকৃষ্ণকীর্তন
category: Bengali Folktale
source: Shreekrishna Kirtana
slug: the-tale-of-radha-and-krishna
language: en
---

[Radha](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radha) and [Krishna](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Krishna), divinely destined to be born as humans on Earth after a prolonged existence together in heaven, began their earthly journey. Radha, at a young age, was married to Ayan Gopa, a eunuch. While Ayan tended to his duties herding cows, Radha was cared for by his aunt, Barai. Alongside other young women, Radha would travel to [Mathura](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathura) to sell curd and milk.

During one of these trips, Barai lost track of Radha. In her search, she approached Krishna, inquiring if he had seen a beautiful girl, and described Radha's appearance. Krishna, upon hearing about Radha's beauty, experienced a sense of unease. He persuaded Barai to convey a romantic proposal to Radha, adorned with gifts of betel leaves and flowers. However, Radha, committed to her marriage, declined the offer. Krishna, in a bold move, blocked Radha and her friends' path as they headed to Mathura to sell curds, playfully demanding a toll for crossing the river. His cheeky demand was that he be allowed to sleep with Radha. Radha firmly refused this proposition. In an attempt to avoid further advances, Radha contemplated cutting her hair to make herself less appealing and fled into the forest. Krishna, determined not to be deterred, followed her into the forest and made love to her.

As autumn arrived, the roads dried up, making them safer and less treacherous. This change in weather allowed people to travel to Mathura on foot to sell milk and curd. However, Radha, once a regular on these trips, stopped leaving her house. She kept the details of her interactions with Krishna a secret from her mother-in-law and husband, out of fear and shame. Krishna, noticing Radha's absence, began to feel a sense of desperation. He cleverly enlisted Barai's help to persuade Radha's mother-in-law to permit Radha to go outside and sell milk and curd. Following her mother-in-law's instructions, Radha ventured outside, but the physical strain of carrying milk and curd, combined with the scorching heat of the sun, left her exhausted. At this moment, Krishna, disguised, approached Radha and offered his assistance in exchange for an embrace. Radha, quickly realizing the deception, cunningly made false promises to get the work done. Krishna, filled with hope, followed Radha, accompanying her to Mathura.

On their return journey from Mathura, Krishna reminded Radha of the embrace she had promised him. Radha, with her quick wit, suggested that it was still too hot and asked Krishna to hold an umbrella over their heads as they walked to Vrindavan. Despite feeling embarrassed and humiliated, Krishna, holding onto hope, agreed to hold the umbrella. However, Radha did not fulfill his expectation, which left Krishna feeling hurt. Choosing not to react in anger towards Radha, Krishna decided to take a different path. He set out to beautify [Vrindavan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vrindavan), hoping to charm Radha. His efforts paid off, as Radha and her friends, mesmerized by the beauty of Vrindavan, forgot their earlier displeasure with Krishna.

Nearby, the [River Yamuna](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yamuna) flowed through Vrindavan, but its waters were poisoned by [Kaliya](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaliya), a five-headed snake residing in the river. In a bold move, Krishna dove into the Yamuna to confront Kaliya. By divine intervention, Krishna overpowered Kaliya, driving him away to the Southern Ocean. However, after his dive, Krishna did not resurface, leading everyone to believe he had drowned. In reality, Krishna had secretly swum to the shore and was sitting on a kadam tree. Meanwhile, Radha and her friends frantically searched for him in the water. Seizing the opportunity, Krishna discreetly took Radha's elephant-pearl-necklace from the riverbank and climbed back up the tree.

Radha, aware of Krishna's antics, decided to take her grievances to Krishna's foster mother, [Yashoda](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yashoda). This action, however, resulted in Krishna becoming annoyed with Radha, and Radha, in turn, was displeased with Krishna. During this time, Barai suggested to Krishna that he should adopt a different strategy and try to win Radha's heart with a love spell. Krishna acquired a divine bow from [Kamadeva](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kamadeva), the god of love, and shot a flower arrow at Radha. Upon being struck by the love-arrow, Radha immediately lost consciousness. Krishna then revived Radha, who, upon regaining consciousness, found herself deeply in love with Krishna. Krishna often played the [flute](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venu), using its melody to attract Radha. The sound of Krishna's flute had a profound effect on Radha, disrupting her cooking and leaving her mind in turmoil, much like a potter's furnace. She found herself unable to sleep and would faint at the mere sight of Krishna in the morning. Barai advised Radha to steal Krishna's flute, as he often fell asleep after playing it all night. Barai believed this was the only solution to Radha's troubles. Following this advice, Radha managed to take the flute. However, Krishna, being astute, quickly figured out who the thief was. Radha then told Krishna that she would return the flute only if he made a promise in front of Barai to never disobey her and never leave her side. Krishna agreed to these terms and thus regained his flute.

Krishna then began to show indifference towards Radha, and as months passed with the arrival and departure of spring, he was nowhere to be seen. This prolonged absence led Radha to lose hope of ever seeing Krishna again. In her longing, Radha asked Barai to help bring Krishna back. She also ventured out herself, under the pretext of selling milk and curd, in search of Krishna. Eventually, she found Krishna playing the flute in Vrindavan.

Confronted by Radha, Krishna expressed his feelings of hurt, telling her, "You have insulted me many times. You made me carry burdens like a common man and humiliated me in front of my mother. That's why I am angry with you." In response, Radha, recognizing her past actions, pleaded for forgiveness, saying, "I was a foolish young girl then. Please forgive me. I cannot endure another day without you. Even if it's with anger, please look at me just one more time." Krishna, considering her plea, stated that if Barai advised him to show affection to Radha, he could consider her request. Finally, Barai stepped in, preparing Radha for a reunion with Krishna.

When Radha falls asleep, Krishna leaves her and goes to Mathura to kill [Kamsa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kamsa). Upon waking up and not finding Krishna, Radha becomes distraught once more. At Radha's request, Barai searches for Krishna and eventually finds him in Mathura. There, Barai conveys Radha's devastation and pleads with Krishna to return to her. However, Krishna, no longer wishing to return to Vrindavan or accept Radha, refuses. He states that he can give up everything but cannot tolerate harsh words. Saying this, he departs from the place.
