---
title: The tale of Kalketu and Fullora
title_bn: কালকেতু ও ফুল্লরার আখ্যান
category: Bengali Folktale
related_links: Chandimangal - English Translation, Kalketu - Audio Summary
slug: the-tale-of-kalketu-and-fullora
language: en
---

A long time before the [Goddess Chandi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chandi) became a household name in Bengal, she wasn't worshipped by anybody at all. However, Chandi longed for the adoration of people, so she decided to make Nilambor, the son of the mighty King of the Gods, [Indra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indra), her first devotee. Chandi spoke to her husband, [Lord Shiva](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shiva). They devised a plan to get Nilambor expelled from the divine realm. However, Shiva hesitated, uncertain about banishing someone who hadn't done anything wrong. Undeterred, Chandi crafted a clever scheme. One day, as Nilambor gathered flowers for his prayers, Chandi transformed into a bee and concealed herself among the petals. When Nilambor presented the flowers to Lord Shiva, the bee stung him. Enraged, Shiva cursed Nilambor and his wife out of heaven. The two were reborn as children in the human world, in separate hunter families. Nilambor became Kalketu, and his wife, Chaya, took on the name Fullora.

As Kalketu and Fullora were a match made in heaven, they were destined to be together on Earth as well. When they grew up, they eventually found each other and got married. Their life together was filled with happiness. Kalketu, a skilled hunter, had a spear so sharp that no forest creature, big or small, could escape it. One day, the frightened animals pleaded with Goddess Chandi for help. So, Chandi, ever scheming, decided to torment Kalketu in various ways. Each day, when he went hunting, a spell cast by Chandi made all the animals invisible to him. The couple found themselves in a dire situation, facing hunger every day. During one hunting trip, Kalketu spotted a lizard in front of him. Desperate to catch something, he seized the lizard, even though it was believed to bring bad luck. Returning home, he asked his wife, Fullora, to prepare the lizard while he went to the neighbors to gather some spices.

It turned out that the lizard was none other than the Goddess Chandi in disguise. Once Kalketu left, she changed into a stunning maiden and introduced herself to Fullora as Kalketu's newlywed wife. Fullora pleaded with her to go away, saying, "Please leave my husband alone. What will people say if they see you?" But Chandi refused to leave.

When Kalketu returned, he was astonished to find a beautiful woman in his house. Nevertheless, Kalketu remained faithful and asked her to depart. When she refused once again, Kalketu took out his bow and shot an arrow at her. In that moment, Chandi transformed back into her divine form and caught the arrow. The two mortals felt humbled in the presence of a Goddess. Chandi then made a promise to them, offering wealth beyond their wildest dreams if they agreed to worship her. To demonstrate her pledge, she materialized a pot overflowing with gold coins and presented it to Kalketu.

Initially doubtful, Kalketu took the pot of gold to a pawnbroker for inspection. The broker tried to trick him, claiming the coins were just bronze plated with gold. However, when Kalketu revealed the coins' divine origin, the broker quickly changed his tune, fearing the wrath of the Goddess. He confirmed the gold's purity and paid Kalketu in full.

Blessed by Chandi, Kalketu and Fullora became devoted worshippers, and in return, the Goddess bestowed upon them immense wealth. They cleared a large plot of land in the Gujarat forest, establishing their own kingdom. Their riches caught the eye of a con-man named Bharu Dutta, who tried to deceive them into making him their minister. When Kalketu refused, Bharu Dutta conspired with the King of the nearby [Kalinga kingdom](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kalinga_(Mahabharata)>), leading to a war. Lacking experience in warfare, Kalketu lost, and the couple ended up in a dungeon, stripped of their wealth.

In their dire situation, Kalketu and Fullora prayed to Chandi for help. The Goddess intervened, appearing before the King of Kalinga and revealing Kalketu's true identity as the son of the almighty Indra. Fearing divine wrath, the King promptly released Kalketu and Fullora, restoring their kingdom. The couple lived a long and prosperous life as king and queen. Upon their eventual passing, they were reunited in heaven as Nilambor and Chaya.
